# Plukk og miks

## Question: Concurrent Linked List

Se under kodesnutter, der ligger en implementasjon i Python av [Joakim Sjøhaug](https://github.com/joakimsjo).

### 3a - Coarse-grained synchronisation

> Implement the add and remove function for a singly linked list using coarse-grained synchronisation.
> We are interested in a simple solution that is thread safe.

### 3b - Starvation

> What is starvation? Can starvation be a problem for your coarse-grained synchronisation implementation in a)?

Starvation is a problem that occurs if a thread is constantly denied access to a shared data structure because of 
other threads holding a lock. This would lead to the thread having slow progress in doing his task. For our implementation
this can be a problem since each thread that is working on the linked list locks the entire list.  

### 3c - Contention

> An issue with coarse-grained synchronization is contention.
> What is contention? Why can we experience contention in systems?

Contention happens when another thread is currently waiting on a lock held by another thread. The thread has to 
block until the other thread is done with it's task. 

### 3d - Fine grained synchronization

> Re-implement the add and remove functions using fine-grained synchronization.
> We are interested in a solution where individual nodes in the list can be locked.

## Question: Terms

1. What is concurrency?
   
    Concurrency is the ability of different algorithms, problems, parts of programs to be executed 
    out-of-order or in partial order without affecting the following result. We can look at concurrency
    as virtual parallel programming. 

2. What is deadlocking?
   
    Deadlocking is a situation that happens if two processes/threads or more are all waiting on each
    other and cannot proceed until one  releases the lock, this leads the program to be stuck and is 
    therefore refereed to as `deadlock`. E.G Thread B held a lock and needs another lock held by A, A held one lock
    and needs another lock that B held. 

3. What is a critical section?
   A critical section is a part of a program where the shared resource is protected by a lock. This is only enabling 
   one thread to gain access to the critical section. 

## Question: Parallel programming laws

### a - Briefly describe Amdahls law

Amdahls law is a law that described how much speedup a program would gain if it is executed parallel. The speedup 
depends on how many cores that you have avilable and how many percent of the code that is possible to execute 
in parallel. Imagine a program where 50% of the code is possible to execute in parallel.  Amdahls law then 
says that the max speedup is 2 times the original speed if you have two cores or more. 

The speed up is s = 1 / (1 - p + (p / n)) where *p* is the fraction of the program that can be run in parallel. 


### b - How does Gustafsons law differ from Amdahls law?

Where Amdahls law only focus on the speedup gained by doing a problem in parallel, Gustafsons law also focus on 
that a parallel platform also allows multiple machines to work on much bigger problems than before. 